#+TITLE:  /The Holmes Complex/: Extending Story Intention Graphs for Interactive Cinematic Narratives
#+SUBTITLE: PhD Advancement Proposal
#+AUTHOR: John Murray
#+HTML_HEAD: <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="../style.css" />
#+HTML_DOCTYPE: html5
#+HTML_CONTAINER: content
#+HTML_LINK_UP: index.html
#+HTML_LINK_HOME: ../index.html
#+INFOJS_OPT: view:content toc:nil ltoc:nil 
#+LATEX_CLASS: llncs
#+LaTeX_HEADER: \frontmatter          % for the preliminariese
#+LaTeX_HEADER: \pagestyle{headings}  % switches on printing of running heads
* Abstract
:PROPERTIES:
:UNNUMBERED: t
:END:
Narrative can be understood as a phenomenon that arises from the
coordination of inherent mental abilities, specifically the ability to
understand the interaction of a set of agents and their goals and
beliefs, and the sequence of causally related events they are involved
in. Computational Narratology investigates and applies narrative
theory using a variety of computational tools in order to assess,
apply and discover properties of this particular type of human
discourse. David Elson released a set of discourse relations to
represent key relationships among concepts from narrative theory,
called the Story Intention Graph (SIG). Elson collected a set of SIG
encodings of selected Aesop’s Fables in order to assess the schemata
and to discover analogous relationships among them.

Computational Narratology currently focuses primarily on textual
narratives, due to their tractability to algorithmic approaches and
the availability of tools from natural language processing. Similarly,
interactive narratives are difficult to apply techniques that have
been designed around a single underlying reality. I propose to use the
concept of operational logics, originally proposed by Noah
Wardrip-Fruin and others to develop a model of the surface of
cinematic choice-based adventure games that takes the representation
of film techniques and the branching logic into account. I propose to
use this model to inform an extension of Elson’s SIG to account for
branching interactive narratives and to publish an encoded version of
Telltale Games' /The Wolf Among Us/. Finally, I will evaluate the
value of this encoded structure for highlighting important narrative
elements by comparing the reported influential content that played a
part in significant decisions, using a list of previous decisions to
specify an encoding of a single traversal using the enhanced SIG that
represents the story values and predecessors highlighted in those
decisions.
* Introduction
#+BEGIN_QUOTE
Our appetite for story is a reflection of the profound human need to
grasp the patterns of living, not merely as an intellectual exercise,
but within a very personal, emotional experience.

/Robert McKee/ \cite{Mckee1997}
#+END_QUOTE

Stories are fashioned from every media. Narrative, and specifically,
story, can be understood as a phenomenon that arises from the
coordination of inherent mental abilities \cite{Herman2013}
\cite{Ryan2010}. Marie-Laure Ryan asserts that "as long as we are able
to construct a world populated with individuated agents, identify
changes of states, ascribe motivations to the agents, and detect
causal relations between events, we understand a text as a story,
whether or not we are aware of what we are doing"
\cite{Ryan2010}. Text can be interpreted more broadly to refer to any
media, including computational media which has as one of its primary
affordances interactivity. This proposal expands existing
computational models of narrative in order to address computational
media artifacts that contain possible stories and which demand that
the players join the protagonist in their most critical decisions.

In order to understand how interaction and story co-exist in
interactive narratives, we will use existing formalisms and theories
for both interactive computational media and computational models of
narrative to develop new tools and techniques and extend previous
ones. The proposed dissertation includes the design, creation and use
of an encoded set of gameplay recordings that reflect a rational
reconstruction of the underlying operational logics in a particular
subgenre of adventure game \cite{Wardrip-Fruin2009} annotated with an
extension of David Elson's computational model of narrative, the Story
Intention Graph (SIG) \cite{Elson2012}. While the extension of these
existing computational models to apply to non-textual artifacts and to
incorporate the possibility space inherent in choice-based narratives,
one of the motivating questions is whether the combination of these
two innovations allow insight into the experience of a player making a
decision in a choice-based adventure game. These insights would
provide guidance on the authoring task and system design of many types
of story games beyond the subgenre described herein, as it would be
the first complete model of the story content of a production
contemporary interactive digital narrative.

Interactive digital narratives represent a possibility space of
potential stories which require non-trivial effort to "experience."
Espen Aarseth calls these works "ergodic literature" in his book,
/Cybertext/ \cite{Aarseth1997}, drawing attention to the properties
that differentiates this medium from other types of literature. Nick
Montfort uses the term "traversal" [fn:5] to describe one possible or
actual story that results from engaging with a work, further
distinguishing "successful" or "complete" traversals based on
completion.  For instance, a failure of the player to overcome an
obstacle, resulting in the character's death, does not always result
in completion of the intended story content, but rather requires the
player to attempt the challenge again before proceeding
\cite{Montfort2006}. Hartmut Koenitz proposed the term "instance" to
describe a parameterized traversal, using the sense prevalent in
computer programming \cite{Hartmut2015}.  Koenitz describes the space
of instances as a "protostory." We will use the term "traversal" to
refer to a sequence of player actions and story content, while the
concept of a protostory will surround much of the discussion of
extending the SIG schemata to incorporate possible worlds . Unlike the
exactness of a transcript of an interactive fiction traversal,
"traversal" in this proposal will refer to a sequence of player
choices and non-interactive segments, where the interactive segments
could vary, but where the order of initial encounter of content during
interactive segments is significant and details such as the exact
movement or timing of navigating spaces or the exact timing of a
choice made during a dialogue choice is not considered, for the
present study, as significant. This definition allows us to remain
focused on the story content without getting distracted by the
totality of possible executions and user inputs that would be possible
with an interactive program, especially one which has sections that
allow the player to remain indefinitely or to revisit content
infinitely.

** Research Questions
:PROPERTIES:
:ID:       kkf7ytm0e7h0@seebright.com
:END:
The proposed dissertation will investigate the following three
research questions which concern computational narratology in
interactive digital narratives and Telltale Games /The Wolf Among Us/
in particular:

- *RQ1*. How do you define and represent, using story control logics,
  the significant story-related surface content of cinematic
  choice-based adventure games?

- *RQ2* What extensions are necessary for the Story Intention Graph
  schemata to cover the possibility space of variations present in the
  story of a cinematic choice-based adventure games?

- *RQ3* Can an extended SIG, encoded with the surface content and
  provided a set of decisions made by a player, predict players'
  attribution of content that influenced their decision in a
  significant choice in /The Wolf Among Us/?

We will unpack the key phrases and terms, starting with the subgenre
of cinematic choice-based adventure games.

*** Cinematic Choice-based Adventure Games
:PROPERTIES:
:ID:       i68is8r0c8h0@seebright.com
:END:

#+CAPTION: Axes describing simulationist/determinstic vs combinatorial/procedural
#+NAME:   fig:simulation_instantial
#+LABEL: fig:simulation_instantial
#+ATTR_LATEX: :width 10cm
[[file:simulationistdeterminist.png]] 

Telltale Game’s /The Wolf Among Us/ was released in 2013 for multiple
platforms. The game received numerous positive critical reviews and
represents a mature example of this subgenre. Its story content is
conveyed through a combination of dialogue, performance of the
characters and cinematography. The game has even been translated into
a comic book, the original media that of the /Fables/ series on which
the game is based \cite{Sturges2014}. This document locates the work
in a subgenre of adventure game, and further places it on two axes.

Figure [[fig:simulation_instantial]] depicts a two-dimensional
categorization scheme and several existing works that are plotted on
both axes. The x axis represent the degree to which the game relies on
simulation, or the mathematical model of physical or other properties
such as the social physics engine of Prom Week \cite{McCoy2012} or the
manners simulation present in /Versu/ \cite{Evans2014}. The negative
direction (toward the left) indicates an increased reliance on an
alogrithm which uses real numbers (Floating points) for the selection
and configuration of content. This is contrasted with games which have
a minimal level of system modeling in favor of hand-authored content
based on human imagination.[fn:8] The second axis charts the
granularity of selection tagging or criteria for content which is
reconfigured. These axes are more for isolating the type of variations
than measuring precisely how this variation exists, though future work
could develop these distinctions further. It is useful to locate the
specific space that the subgenre of cinematic choice-Based adventure
games occupies: where story content is coded to be presented to the
player in a very specific order and under very specific conditions and
where virtually no unexpected sequence of content occurs.[fn:9] The
label "cinematic choice-based adventure game" was chosen not because
it is the popular name used for this subgenre of adventure games,
which could be considered a hybrid of the point-and-click adventure
game and interactive movie, but rather for how it highlights the
primary mechanics (making choices) and the primary representational
mode (cinematic) as well as including the historical genre of
adventure games which is distinguished by distinct authored
player-character(s) and an emphasis on story.

The adventure game genre is often put in opposition to genres which
promote more player freedom, such as in Massively Multiplayer Role
Playing Games (MMORPGs) or Open World RPGs which allow players to
create and develop their own character. Clara Fernandez-Vara describes
in her dissertation how adventure games shape "the means by which the
player restores the behavior that is expected by playing the game"
\cite{ClaraFernandez-Vara2009}. In other words, in adventure games,
the player takes actions that are authored by the game's creator
rather than have those actions emerge from the system's behaviors. The
player's choices vary the way in which that performance is carried out
as well as certain key facts that make up the plot. Most decisions and
actions only have an impact on the pacing or variation of the
performance rather than ontological changes in the plot, such as the
timing for choosing menu options or choosing two options that have the
same outcome but which have apparent different descriptive text. Some
choices result in content which provides the player satisfaction later
in the game, labeled the "payoff" in this document. Another term that
will be useful is the concept of an "influential thread", or content
that plays a role in affecting a future player decision.

Cinematic choice-based adventure games avoid themed puzzles such as
the cake puzzle in Graeme Devine's /7th Guest/, coordination skill
tests such as the various object and physics puzzles in Valve's
/Portal/ or abstract logic puzzles such as found in Jonathan Blow's
/The Witness/. Instead the subgenre favors dramatically staged choices
that branch the story's presentation, making it an ideal candidate for
modeling the surface story content in the context of a specific subset
of operational logics, named story control logics in this document,
that overlap with interface and performance logics. Operational logics
provides a set of theoretical tools to talk about how the
representations, specifically the affordances of the representations
in the form of interfaces and objects as interfaces, are consistently
representative of processes that are outside of the story (they
control the story's flow) and yet are necessary to abstract the actual
set of traversals possible. One way of looking at the story control
logic is that of a rational reconstruction of the underlying code that
was used in selecting content through the official Telltale
tool. Rational reconstruction involves investigating the inner
workings of a system by creating a version of it and comparing the two
systems. Brandon Tearse, Noah Wardrip-Fruin and Michael Mateas used
this technique in creating a rational reconstruction of Minstrel, both
due to the loss of the original work and to investigate potential
improvements \cite{Tearse2010a}. The evaluation of the surface story
content is detailed in section [[id:ep1b8cd159h0@seebright.com]], but it
differs in that the goal is not to understand the underlying
computational system, but rather to use a reconstruction of the system
to understand the mapping between the choices and the narrative
through the deep story structure.

There are some examples of choices which provide payoff based on the
player's observation skills, two examples include putting together
parts of a murder scene and catching Mr. Toad in a lie, but these do
not gate progress. Marie-Laure Ryan describes changes that effect the
world of the narrative as ontological versus exploratory, which covers
the mode where the reader encounters content in a different orders
based on different orders for a traversal \cite{Ryan2001}. The
variation of interest is the ontological variation that is modulated
by the story control logic, though some exploratory sections are
present in the subgenre, particularly segments where a number of nodes
can be visited in any order without affecting the story world.

/The Wolf Among Us/ is episodic: future episodes must account for
previous player decisions. This requirement is different from
stand-alone story games which often have a greater variety of
endings. An example of a non-episodic story game in the interactive
drama genre is Michael Mateas and Andrew Stern's collaboration,
/Façade/ \cite{mateas2003integrating}, or the text-based /Versu/
\cite{Evans2014}. In /Façade/, there are several possible outcomes
determined by player's interactions with the characters. Replayability
is one of the stated design goals, and to that end the variations and
additional content reward the player with deeper insight into the
characters and the history through repeated engagement. In contrast,
episodic story games build on decisions made by the player in previous
episodes and have limited replay value due to the amount of content
that is necessarily conserved. Other non-episodic games, such as
/Heavy Rain/,[fn:6] are closely related in their operational logics
and their suitability for discovering content relationships using the
techniques proposed in this document.

By conserving content and maximizing payoffs among possible
traversals, this subgenre is ideally suited to algorithmic traversal
by the intentional frames captured by SIGs, as the player’s goals and
intentions are rewarded while the story remains relatively consistent.

*** Story Control Logics
:PROPERTIES:
:ID:       tx6har00e8h0@seebright.com
:END:

Noah Wardrip-Fruin introduced the analytical concept of operational
logics \cite{Wardrip-fruin} to describe the synergistic relationship
of abstract process and representational goals. He did so in the
context of understanding the relationships between surface, process
and data in the work leading up to the book /Expressive Processing/,
and described some of the key insights there \cite{Wardrip-Fruin2009}.
The concept was later formalized and further defined in collaboration
with Michael Mateas in \cite{Mateas2009b}:

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
An operational logic defines an authoring (representational)
strategy, supported by abstract processes or lower-level logics, for
specifying the behaviors a system must exhibit in order to be
understood as representing a specified domain to a specified
audience. \cite{Mateas2009b}
#+END_QUOTE

Operational logics can be used to precisely model and analyze how an
author communicates through a set of abstract processes and
representations an underlying "domain" with an audience. This
proposal's surface content model depends on the slipperiness of the
domain of human affairs that is narrative, and how at the same time
operational logics "determine the state evolution of a system," how
they specify an abstract model of the underlying system, "with how
they are understood at a human level," through the proposed encoding
\cite{Mateas2009b}. Some examples of operational logics that are
proposed by Wardrip-Fruin include collision logics and dialogue tree
logics, which reflect certain strategies to manage the content and the
actual experience of engaging with it \cite{Wardrip-Fruin2009}. As
long as a particular logic is maintained throughout a work, and that
logic reflects a systematic application of an underlying process, it
can be fruitfully analyzed as an operational logic. In this section,
the operational logics targeted are principally those that control and
represent the branching of the story and not necessarily logics that
pertain to any underlying simulation of the story domain. In this way,
they are not that much different than dialogue tree logics or the use
of quest flags, and the proposed SIG extension takes advantage of that
simplicity. The main difference is that the strategy of reflecting the
choices through interfaces are tied to an underlying time-based
performance that is critical to the pacing of the dramatic work.

The encoding of the surface representation depends on a model of the
underlying operations that each of the proposed story control
logics. These logics occupy the intersection between (graphical)
interface logics and performance logics, as they provide the player
with options tied to an underlying content selection architecture as
well as afford the player a set of performance options that either
determine or enact the choices.

The state evolution and representational strategy of cinematic
choice-based adventure games is represented by modeling the following
*story control logics*:

| Operational Logic Name       | Description                                                 |
|------------------------------+-------------------------------------------------------------|
| *1* /Response Selection/     | Language-based menus that reflect player-character options. |
| *2* /Object-Verb Selections/ | Verb-selection for object or character.                     |
| *3* /Inventory/              | Objects that either reflect ongoing or past plots           |
| *4* /Quick-time/             | Affordances that require enactment to proceed               |
| *5* /"Payoff" Signaling/     | Text that indicates (truthfully or not) underlying state    |
|                              |                                                             |

There are other operational logics at work, such as collision logics
and camera control logics, but these don't affect the story structure
as defined by the SIG. The four above operational logics cover every
relevant non-linear control mechanism and corresponding
representation. These logics must be reflected in a surface model in
order to represent the possible variations. Because of the importance
of these control logics in determining the surface structure, we will
review each in the following sections.

**** Response Selection
Response selection is so named because it how a player selects the
next actions or intent of the character. Like most adventure games,
the character itself actually carries out the action or dialogue, and
even sometimes the way a particular choice plays out may differ from
what was anticipated. The underlying operation is simply one of
selecting the content to be played.

**** Object-Verb Selection
This logic is a variant on the response selection, except that it
plays the character interacting with an object instead of interacting
with a character and often has physical actions instead of dialogue
options. An example is either knocking or kicking down a door, or
picking up an object.

**** Inventory Logics
In this logic, the main function is as a flag to whether certain
content choices are available. Secondarily, it is a reminder of
important plot threads.
**** Quick-time
This represents the enactment of the player of a particular situation
the character is in, often through repeated button presses or through
a quick decision in a heated moment. Failing these may result in
replaying from a checkpoint, so most do not branch the story.
**** /"Payoff" signaling

This is one of the more complex logics that may not determine
underlying state at all, but rather simply shaping player expectations
of how their decision affected agents. It is because of this
expectation that it needs to be represented as a distinct logic in the
surface story content, and because it is consistently applied in a way
that would suggest an underlying model is being affected.

The complexity of navigating the surface content defined by these
logics and the recorded gameplay motivates the creation of a "story
browser" tool to aid analyzing the distribution and patterns that the
content takes. This tool is discussed further in section
[[id:pc99b2h0i8h0@seebright.com]].

*** Surface Story Content
:PROPERTIES:
:ID:       89e9zj61i8h0@seebright.com
:END:
In this section, we will review the motivation behind modeling the
surface story content with respect to existing models of narrative
discourse. We will further review why the content of /The Wolf Among
Us/ cannot be represented by mapping it onto a simple text.

The concept of *surface story content* represents the narrative
content that is conveyed to a player. The name derives from the idea
that story-related information, also known as content, in contemporary
published games, is primarily authored through "scripting"[fn:2]. It
is scripted in the sense of an authored script that details the
content of a dramatic work, including directions for action and mood.
The story content, relies on an interpretation by a player of the
surface of that content to describe agents pursuing goals through
various channels, specifically the dialogue lines spoken, the text
rendered and the actions portrayed, rather than an understanding of
the underlying computationally modeled simulation as in the case of
physics simulated content or the properties of weapons and targets in
the case of projectile-based or item-based content. The system that is
interpreted operates at the level of agents pursuing goals within the
context of an overall story. Games which fall under this category
include /The Wolf Among Us/ \cite{TelltaleGames2013}, /Life is
Strange/ \cite{DontnodEntertainment2015} and /Kentucky Route Zero/
\cite{Elliott2013}.

Surface Story Content in this document refers to the primary
/instantial/ content that determines the interpretation of story
elements in a traversal.  For instance, it would be sufficient to
describe the surface story content by using sequences of gameplay
recordings in the form of dialogue, captured gameplay video and
interface elements, especially insofar as these traversals have
sections that are considered shared. The surface story content is
modeled using gameplay recordings and the logical structure that
determines their selection them from within the game. It can spans the
possibility space of story content from any potential (meaningfully
different) traversal. This approach accounts for the fact that an
infinite loop could occur in an actual traversal by only accounting
for the initial visit to "cutscenes" and not assuming new information
is provided through repetitive visits even if possible in a given
segment (such as an exploratory segment where a given object could be
repeatedly examined).

As opposed to the set of recorded traversal sections, modeled along
with potential player choices, a Story Intention Graph encoding of a
story is referred to in this document as the *deep story
structure*. This is the underlying set of relationships between
events, characters, beliefs, goals and affect that the audience forms
as they witness a story unfolding, and is influenced by narratological
theories.  The SIG incorporates all three of Mieke Bal’s levels of
narrative structure: the /text/, or the set of signs are represented
by /Text Nodes/, the /story/, or the sequence of presented happenings
or events influenced the /text/ nodes sequencing, and the /fabula/
level is reflected in the /state/ node and its ontological status as
the truth of a story, or the entirety of the fictional world that is
ordered into the /story/. Surface Story Content, as described above,
corresponds to the /text and discourse/ levels of Bal's model and the
deep story content to the story level for interactive works where such
an approach is possible \cite{Bal2009}. 

Noah Wardrip-Fruin cites three components of computational media
works: surface, processes and data \cite{Wardrip-Fruin2009}. While the
term "surface story content" is inspired by this usage, in order for
it to occupy the role it needs to its sense is extended to incorporate
the representational strategies of the key operational logics. For
brevity, we will refer to the surface story content as the surface
content, and understand that it does not include every detail of the
surface representation but only those aspects which are necessary in
understanding the story.

David Elson’s Story Intention Graphs refers to the "Textual Layer" in
his dissertation as fulfilling this role: "a linear vector of nodes
that contain the *utterances of the original discourse* that is being
modeled." Elson mentions that this layer could also be visual or oral,
but does not elaborate on the exact way that such works would be
handled. /Scheherazade/ \cite{Elson2012} is a Java program designed
for annotators to encode SIGs from plain text narratives. The system
references individual segments of a source text by the beginning and
ending index within the original text, and these spans are used to
anchor propositions in the timeline layer. The timeline layer then
affords connecting proposition nodes[fn:3] with points or intervals in
time represented by states based on /TimeML/ \cite{Ingria2003}. This
representation would work equally well by referencing timecodes in a
video or panels in a comic that does not branch, but must be extended
to account for branching logic of interactive digital narratives. A
more detailed review of how Elson’s SIG format is suitable can be
found in section [[id:9k4lun20i8h0@seebright.com]], while a description of
the elements of the schemata can be found in section [[id:8zs4eaz059h0@seebright.com]].

The proposed model for surface story content is a data structure that
incorporates three types of information, two which are generated
instantial assets: the sequence of images or frames and the
accompanying synchronized audio. The third is a transcription and time
encoding of linguistic content either spoken or shown. The sequence of
images, or shots, correspond to the traditional definition, a
continuous view from a single virtual camera. The term "segment" is
introduced as a way of organizing sequences of shots that are always
played together between "control points", points in a traversal where
the surface story content diverges. For instance, following a player
choice, one of four segments would result, each of which may share
shots with the others.

This model of surface and text is useful because it affords certain
means of measuring the surface content without access to the
implementation of the underlying processes, even as it presents
problems. In this way it is a form of rational reconstruction, like
that used with /Minstrel/ \cite{Tearse2010a}. Unlike works of film,
the surface content of games are determined during execution by player
input. Further, although words and phrases offer a natural
segmentation of meaning for textual narratives, and each word presents
a denotative meaning and a sentence can be considered a vehicle for
meaning which can be modeled by multiple propositions, as Elson
enables through mappings of proposition nodes to text nodes, it is not
obvious how to provide hooks for annotation of cinematic interactive
narratives whose interpreted meaning may be spread across shots, or be
present in a character's expression, or even by connotated by the
underlying subtext of an interaction or the connotations of the set
design.

A single line of dialogue might be performed across multiple shots, or
discrete continuous sequences of frames as taken by a virtual
camera. Would each shot be a segment of meaning, or would the line of
dialogue be treated as an atomic whole?  These questions are central
to creating and assessing a model of surface content model.

Section [[id:7ag9o190f8h0@seebright.com]] goes into detail about what an
objective surface story content dataset might like, but the
anticipated form is that of a collection of of recorded gameplay
videos of traversal story segments that are referenced by a model of
the story control logics. This combination of content and logic
results in a dataset that contains all possible traversals (that
contain a unique sequence of initially-encountered content) and their
corresponding shots/sequences.

The encoded dataset (including "objective" annotations such as
textual representations of dialogue, timing, characters present, etc)
will be annotated with the appropriate interpretive SIG elements, in
particular the represented goals, plans, the affect endpoint of
goals/plans and the constituent events or planned events.

The broader questions of how to achieve and measure agency and how the
property of interactivity influences narrative experience have been
topics of interest in the interactive storytelling community and is
often cited as a central concern in interactive narratives. Janet
Murray described it as a "satisfying power" in \cite{Murray1997a},
Michael Mateas directly addresses how to achieve it through balancing
formal and material constraints in \cite{mateas2001preliminary}, and
Stacey Mason expanded related definitions involving the distinction
between diegetic and extra-diegetic agency in \cite{Mason2013}, while
Mateas and Noah Wardrip-Fruin refined the definition to include the
computational model in \cite{Wardrip-Fruin2009b}. In this proposal,
the third research question (RQ3) addresses a particular type of
player experience that is at the core of the subgenre identified. The
satisfying feeling of making an important narrative choice is one
which is unique to this genre, and understanding how it operates
depends heavily on the deep story structure of the work. The rest of
this section introduces the discipline of computational narratology
and the concept of a Deep Story Structure, followed by the three main
research questions and their explication.

*** Deep Story Structure
Instead of producing a novel computational model of narrative, the
proposed dissertation builds on David Elson's Story Intenton Graph
schemata \cite{Elson2012}. The SIG was shown to be useful for
discovering analogies and has been recognized in the computational
narrative modeling community as an important effort
\cite{Goguen2010a}. The SIG schemata consists of three layers of
structure that interrelate: the textual layer, the timeline layer and
the interpretive layer. The schemata incorporates concepts from
previous models such as Wendy Lehnert's plot units \cite{Lehnert1981},
and specifically attempts to create a robust and expressive model that
captures the aspects of a story that are salient. This includes
relationships amongst intentional agents pursuing goals across
time. It also means not specifying a knowledge representation for
propositions, but rather the topological structure that assist in
describing how agents, beliefs, goals and values relate to one
another. The *textual layer* captures the surface representations of
the work, while the *timeline layer* models the actual events conveyed
by those representations. The *interpretive layer* captures the
inferences and motivations that may only be implied or hinted at in
the surface of the work.

Elson’s structure addresses several deficiencies of previous models of
narrative discourse, and is an example of the approach of contributing
not only a model but a set of data that makes use of that model, a
collection of annotations of Aesop’s Fables named the DramaBank
\cite{Elson2012b}. These annotations are used to evaluate the
effectiveness of the schema for capturing structural similarities
between different human annotations of the same story, as well as to
identify potential analogical relationships between different stories
in the collection.

Elson used the SIG schemata to investigate analogous relationships
among Aesop's Fables. He relied on human annotators to interpret the
structures that SIG describes and compared multiple attempts to
interpret individual stories as a measure of utility and accuracy of
SIG itself \cite{Elson2012b}. We go into more detail later on SIG in
sections [[id:9k4lun20i8h0@seebright.com]] and 

*** Players' Attribution of Content that Influenced their Decision
Stories are a mental phenomena. In this sense, their subjective
effects can only be understood through those who experience
stories. While cognitive narratology makes claims about general mental
faculties that either arise from or are created through the capacity
for narrative, the third research question is focused primarily on a
more practical concern. Given a traversal path, can the combination of
a SIG and the encoded surface structure of a work predict which parts
of the traversal were most influential on the player's decision making
process?

This question avoids some of the core uncertainty around agency, as it
specifically deals with the experience of making a choice in the
context of the game from a provided (small) set of choices. Later in
the game, a large variety of content will have been experienced by the
player, some of which will be more important to the narrative and
valued relationships while others, though containing the characters or
settings involved, will not. Understanding how to predict and
understand the relationship and value of such content can make
authoring such stories more effective, predicting traversals where
there may be an imbalance of content to make decisions more
challenging.

Marie-Laure Ryan addresses the myth that a wide variety of choices are
a desirable property of interactive narratives in /Avatars of Story/
\cite{Ryan2006c}, alongside other purported myths that emerge from
early scholarship and theories. Michael Mateas considers resolving the
"paradox" of agency in story where such meaningful choices are not
pervasive as one of the primary goals of interactive drama and
interactive storytelling \cite{mateas2001preliminary}. Mateas put
forward a proposition that "creating a sense of both story and agency
(interactivity) requires 'merely' the hard task of balancing material
and formal constraints" \cite{Mateas2002b}, where the formal
affordances consist of what is desirable or indicated is possible and
the material refers to the set of things which can be potentially
acted upon in the presentation of a scenario. In this sense, the
attribution of previously experienced content is a means of measuring
the formal constraints whereas examining the offered choices is a way
of measuring the material affordances at the time of the decision.

The hypothesis, further expanded in section
[[id:ip68y67159h0@seebright.com]], is that this relationship is clearly
evident once the content has been encoded using the two methods, first
through an encoding of the surface story structure and second through
an interpretation of that surface story structure in a deep story
structure through an encoding using the extended SIG.

** Overview of proposed contributions
There are a few existent systems designed to support annotating and
analyzing stories through computational means. David Elson's
/Scheherazade/ is specifically designed to apply the SIG formalism to
textual narratives, whereas Mark Finlayson developed a more
generalized approach to annotating textual stories in his /Story
Workbench/, an integrated environment based on /Eclipse/
\cite{Finlayson2008}. Finlayson hypothesized that assisting an
annotator with suggestions would help increase the number and quality
of available annotations for future work, whereas Elson primarily
focused on providing accurate feedback in the form of presenting the
understood meaning back to the annotator.

The proposed contributions will include creating and releasing a set
of systems that specifically target complex, interactive multi-media
games in the cinematic choice-based adventure game subgenre. This
system incorporates lessons from /Scheherazade/ and /Story Workbench/
and the target platform is HTML5 to enable the use of crowdsourcing
evaluations and potentially even leveraging Amazon's Mechanical Turk.

Another contribution is the encoding of a long form contemporary
narrative. The genres of fable and parable, although compact in their
representation of some narratological principles, are not good
examples of the incorporation of suspense or mystery, and the
originals on which much of the research is based are
non-interactive[fn:7]. The length of the work affects the full impact
of certain events later in the story. For instance, by the end of /The
Wolf Among Us/, the player will have established a number of
relationships, made several decisions and accumulated impressions that
will determine the subjective experience of the ending in ways that
shorter works or selections from a complete work cannot address.

Many practitioners of computational narratology cite the extension of
the techniques to address non-textual and interactive media as an
important next step in understanding the cross-media nature of
narrative. For example, in the living handbook of narratology,
Inderjeet Mani states "As a hybrid of game and narrative that spans
multiple media, interactive narrative represents a new and evolving
genre. What novel constructs from computational narratology are
applicable here, and which old ones need refinement?"
\cite{Goguen2010a}. Fox Harrell, in his dissertation, specifically
calls out media annotation as an area for future research
\cite{Harrell2007}. Hartmut Koenitz calls for work on segmenting what
he termed "protostories," also described in this document, as an
important step in furthering theory of interactive digital narratives.

The proposed work hopes to make a contribution to this collective
effort and enable future work that reveals even more about narratives,
how they work and even how to author content for them more
efficiently.

* Related Work 
In this section we will review work that informs and relates to the
[[id:kkf7ytm0e7h0@seebright.com][Research Questions]]. The approach of applying theories and building
systems in computational narratology is inherently multidisciplinary,
comprising insights from narratology, computational linguistics, game
studies, interactive digital narratives, artificial intelligence and
film studies.

There are three major threads that weave together the proposed
research questions and their concern with structures both on the
surface and beneath it. The first section reviews some of the work
done in applying concepts from narratology in developing and assessing
computational models of narrative and the various purposes they serve,
primarily in the influential areas of automated understanding and
generation. The second section, computational narratology, will review
key works and theorists who are explicitly interested in the
intersection of narratology and computation, contextualizing the
proposed work and contributions within existing efforts to understand
and test narrative models and analyze datasets, including the selected
narrative discourse model, Story Intention Graphs. Finally, the field
of interactive digital narratives is viewed with an eye to description
and categorization, with particular attention paid to how the target
object's subgenre relates to the key concerns, genres and disciplinary
traditions as well as which communities would be most interested in
the results.

The three sections are not necessarily chronologically ordered, but
rather represent three overlapping perspectives which contextualize
and motivate the proposed work.

** Narratives Understanding and Generation
In the introduction, we introduced the concept and value of
narratology in its relation to the proposed model of [[id:89e9zj61i8h0@seebright.com][Surface Story
Content]]. Here we will review the systems and purposes that narrative
models have adopted over the years.

Todorov coined the term narratology in the 1960s, (‘la narratologie)
\cite{Tzvetan2012a}, though the methods and discipline has its origins
well before in Aristotle and more recently in Russian formalism with
Vladimir Propp and his famous and oft-cited analysis of Russian
folktales \cite{Propp1928}. Todorov even referenced this need to
vacillates between theory and analysis in his article, saying "it is
always a question of going continually back and forth, from abstract
literary properties to individual works and vice versa. Poetics and
description are in fact two complementary activities"
\cite{Tzvetan2012a}.

What can computers do with narratives? This question, and variants
around the acts of communication and knowing, were what motivated
early AI researchers such as Roger Schank to pursue narrative and its
formal representations, as well as inspiring a community of
researchers interested in applying advances and innovations in using
computers as media to understand and create with.

*** Knowledge Representations
While one of the first experiences of character and of illusion was
the famous ELIZA: DOCTOR program \cite{Man1966}, whose significance
and early reception has been analyzed by Noah Wardrip-Fruin
\cite{Wardrip-Fruin2009} as the progenitor of a strong potential for
artistic and expressive uses of computers, Schank was very interested
in using data structures to explore the core of what understanding
meant, and in particular how to get at it through models. SAM (Script
Applier Mechanism) was a system designed to understand stories through
the concept of a script \cite{Schank1975}. It was represented its
understanding in the form of paraphrases and summaries, and was
designed around a similar idea that resulted in Alan Turing's famous
Turing Test: if a system can produce the same types of responses as a
human, then it may have arrived at it through similar processes, or
similar enough as to be considered intelligent.

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
In some ways, it is ironic that conceptual dependency and its
derivatives are often grouped into the family of semantic net
representations, because in general, semantic nets are a structure
theory, whereas CD is a content theory. \cite{Lytinen1992}
#+END_QUOTE

In this sense, Elson's Story Intention Graphs are more in the
tradition of Conceptual Dependency graphs because of the attention to
the content that is being targeted, namely representations of story
and of the mind itself. Wendy Lehnert, creator of the plot unit
formalism, echoes this parallelism between cognitive and computational
structures \cite{Lehnert1981}:

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
How is the hierarchical ordering of a memory representation
constructed at the time of understanding? Exactly what elements of the
memory representation are critical in building this structure? What
search processes are used to examine memory during summarization? How
are summaries produced after memory has been accessed?
#+END_QUOTE

"Scripts" were a formalism that Schank codified that capture the
notion that knowledge has a structure that is accessed, reified and
run. The classic example of a restaurant script is one where a set of
behaviors are suggested by an environment, and that the knowledge
surrounding that set of expectations enables actors to behave
appropriately. This is explored by the crowd-sourced project known as
/The Restaurant Game/ conducted by Orkin and Roy \cite{Orkin2009}.

The concept of a script was an inspiration for Short and Evans in the
/Versu/ social practice system \cite{Evans2014} while /Prom Week/ uses
a theory from social-psychology along with an exchange unit that
follows a game.

Marie-Laure Ryan addresses the role of formal representations in
aiding human understanding in her chapter on /Formalizing Plot/ in
/Possible Worlds, Artificial Intelligence and Narrative Theory/
\cite{Ryan1991} by suggesting that a graph representation should make
things that are obvious to a reader obvious from reading the diagram,
and things that are subtle, subtle. This goal of accurately
representing the mental structures of story diverge from that of
making apparent relationships and structures which may be parallel to
the mental structures themselves. This goal of achieving a useful
diagrammatic notation for a representation is not necessarily shared
by Elson in his Story Intention Graph formalism, though he often
employs a variant of the schemata in creating diagrams that omit
subsections in order to maintain clarity. For the purposes of scope,
the proposed work outlined in this document does not include dynamic
representations of narrative diagrams, but this may change based on
time and value provided.

*** Generating Narratives
Generating stories has been shown to be one of the most challenging
and most easily appreciated uses of computational models. The interest
in telling stories using computational means within the field of
Artificial Intelligence began with Robert Schank's lab and research
group and their concern with representing knowledge. The extension of
this understanding to the creation of novel stories and artifacts is a
natural progression, even if the original generative system did not
concern itself with narratives at all: /ELIZA: DOCTOR/
\cite{Man1966}. James Meehan created a program, Tale-spin
\cite{Meehan1981} to explore the automated generation of narratives
using models and simulations of communication and meaninng. Lebowitz
played more with representation in his system /Universe/, which
charted the lives of soap opera characters as various events put them
into continual cycles of conflict. They used hand-authored conventions
and tropes to substitute for exhaustive real-world knowledge
structures \cite{MichaelLebo1984}. Both use fairly procedural
structural transformations in order to model aspects of plot, but
/Universe/ and many recent spiritual successors have acknowledged the
limitations imposed by using techniques such as planning along with a
complete knowledge representation. They capitalize on hand-authored
content to fill in the structures.

One of the key problems in generating narratives is the final media
and presentation of the generated narrative. Tale-Spin used a simple
text generator, "mumble," to present the plans held in memory for
inspection. Nick Montfort leveraged his experience in interactive
fiction to create a system to experiment with the different ways that
time and narration can be varied through various natural language
pipelines and facilities. His project, /Curveship/
\cite{Montfort2009}, is very much a work of computational
narrative. It uses a simulation and a model to produce narrative
communication acts which could be varied parametrically. This system
is an excellent example of computational narratology, even though its
concern was primarily with the linguistic consequences of time and
style on narrated text, it provided a test for theories surrounding
the perception of event orders.
** Computational Narratology
:PROPERTIES:
:ID:       zs8ipn70i8h0@seebright.com
:END:
#+BEGIN_QUOTE
Computational narratology is the study of narrative from the point of
view of computation and information processing. It focuses on the
algorithmic processes involved in creating and interpreting
narratives, modeling narrative structure in terms of formal,
computable representations. Its scope includes the approaches to
storytelling in artificial intelligence systems and computer (and
video) games, the automatic interpretation and generation of stories,
and the exploration and testing of literary hypotheses through mining
of narrative structure from corpora \cite{Goguen2010a}.
#+END_QUOTE

The proposed work is principally about how to operationalize and
discover new properties about narrative through a specific subgenre of
interactive digital narratives. Cavazza and Pizzi describe how
computational narratology emerged from several approaches to
formalizing narrative from the existing disciplinary traditions
\cite{Cavazza2006b}.

There have also been several conference series that explore different
perspectives on computation and narratives. The ACM Workshops on Story
Representation, Mechanism and Context, which was held in 2004, 2006
and 2011, looked at both the creation and analysis of stories and
related technologies in a variety of media but focused mainly on
nonfictional scenarios. The Intelligent Narrative Technologies
workshop series was started by Mark Riedl and Brian Magerko in 2007
alongside the Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence conference (AAAI). The International Conference on
Interactive Digital Storytelling (ICIDS) conference series provides a
venue for theoretical and creative works in interactive storytelling
and how to evaluate such works.

Using computation to study and create narratives has come to be
labeled as computational narratology \cite{Goguen2010a}, although the
usage has overlaps with interactive digital narratives, interactive
storytelling and computational models of narrative. Fox Harrell uses
computational narratology to investigate algorithms and formalisms
that support blending of concepts and metaphors \cite{Harrell2007},
while Henrik Schärfe embarked on an early investigation of how
computers can be used in analyzing narratives, /A Study in Computer
Aided Narrative Analysis/ \cite{Scharfe2004}.  It may be useful to
keep the analytical sense of computational narratology distinct from
practices that use it to describe approaches for creation of
interactive digital narratives works. This analytical sense is the one
used in the rest of this document.

Some of the key theorists who explicitly identify as practicing
computational narratology are Inderjeet Mani, author of the recently
published /Computational Modeling of Narratives/ \cite{Mani2012}, Fox
Harrell's work on using algebraic semiotics to understand and generate
representations and analogies, and Mark Finlayson, founder of the
Computational Models of Narrative workshop. Another early researcher
was Henrik Schärfe. His work looks at the task of formalizing aspects
of narratology for the purposes of analyzing and subsequently aiding
in interpretation \cite{Scharfe2004}. Unlike Elson, his approach uses
conceptual graphs to model aspects of content in narratives, which
places a larger emphasis on uniform granularity of formalism whereas
Elson's approach separates the structure clearly away from the
propositional logic level. Conceptual graphs were proposed by John
Sowa based heavily on Charles Sanders Peirce's existential graphs
\cite{Sowa2008}. Henrik's approach to using computational tools allows
for a human interpretation and does not go directly into using numbers
to explain everything: "actual interpretations are outside the domain
of interest here, because the really interesting part of (structural)
analyses takes place as an discussion of how the elements rendered by
the analysis relate to each other... the actual interpretation, along
with speculations and ideas pertaining to the consequences of that
interpretation must reside in the hands of humans" \cite{Scharfe2004}.

*** Annotation Efforts
The idea of annotating works or collections of works is a fairly well
established practice in the digital humanities and computational
linguistics. One of the initial initiatives to encode non-digital
information was the Text Encoding Initiative, an international
organization founded in 1987. Examples of an encoded set of works
includes the classic folk tales studied by Vladimir Propp. More
recently, close content analysis has fallen primarily under the social
sciences domain, especially applying to sentiment analysis and
understanding the prevalance of a topic or practice based on freely
available natural language texts residing on the web and in forums.

*** Story Intention Graphs
:PROPERTIES:
:ID:       9k4lun20i8h0@seebright.com
:END:
David Elson developed a set of discourse relations comprising a
schemata which are collectively entitled "Story Intention
Graph." These relations are defined by a semantic graph consisting of
labeled nodes, arcs and a set of logical relationships that determine
"legal" associations amongst them. In this section, I will briefly
review the key features of the SIG schemata that make it a suitable
model for the proposed work.

Of the many formal models and accompanying datasets and applications
of story content, David Elson's Story Intention Graph is the only
model which has been validated through the application and comparison
to a baseline algorithm using a corpus of annotated, existing
stories. Elson's model is a synthesis of a number of previous
models. Elson describes Story Intention Graphs as a formalism whose
goal is to be *robust*, "emphasizing the key elements of narrative
rather than attempting to model the entire semantic world"
\cite{Elson2012}, *expressive and computable*, such that it is "formal
enough to allow us to find analogies, identify patterns, and design
summaries of narrative content" and *accessible* and so able to be
used by human annotators with minimal training \cite{Elson2012}.

SIGs encodings are suitable for computational analysis using graph
traversal algorithms that are aware of the node types and properties
such as causal entailment. Elson's primary research goal was to
compare SIGs, and through this goal he was able to validate that even
encoding structures of goals, beliefs and affects which didn't
explicitly include propositional content were useful to discover
relationships across works using annotators \cite{Elson2012}. He was
also interested in analogy, and his schemata enables the computational
discovery of analogies between different stories, as well as the
recognition and incorporation into a machine learning classification
scheme of well-defined "patterns" that composed a library of story
patterns much like Lehnert's plot units.

These properties that help tackle the right balance of formality and
expressivity make SIGs a good match for the types of
questions pursued in the proposed dissertation. The ability to extend
the schemata also allows for the types of structures present in
interactive works to be represented in the model, in particular the
diverging traversal paths as determined by the story control logics of
the work.

The types of nodes are briefly described in section
[[id:havh9l7069h0@seebright.com]], whereas the arc types are described in
section [[id:3macmm7069h0@seebright.com]]. Elson's dissertation contains
the definitive definitions, including logical rules present in the
schemata \cite{Elson2012}.

*** Film and Media
Two of the primary adjacent fields, narratology and film studies, owe
a debt to linguistics and semiotics. Both embarked on searches for
meaning through structure and both seek to identify universal
properties. Narratology, unlike film studies, focuses on the study of
stories independent of medium. Film Studies focuses on concerns
specific to that medium. As part of the proposed work, the field of
film studies and criticism, especially as it relates to semiotic codes
and conventions will need to be further explored in relation to the
proposed system and study.

Film studies will primarily influence the surface story content, and
in particular guide the story-relevant codes that should be
highlighted and annotated. These codes are already reflected in the
usage of terms such as shots and sequences, but there are other
significant choices present in film that are not necessarily choices
in literary or purely textual narratives. These include costume,
actions and performances and even setting and camera angles (wide view
and close ups). These choices reflect an intentional stance by the
author for how a scene should be interpreted, and the importance in an
encoding is also apparent.

** Interactive Digital Narratives
#+BEGIN_QUOTE
The combination of narrativity and interactivity oscillates between
two forms: the narrative game, in which narrative meaning is
subordinated to the player’s actions, and the playable story, in which
the player’s actions are subordinated to narrative meaning. Or, to put
it differently, in a narrative game, story is meant to enhance
gameplay, while in a playable story, gameplay is meant to produce a
story \cite{Ryan2015b}.
#+END_QUOTE

In the brief history of the field of game studies, the narrativist vs
ludologist debate has been seen as an opportunity to build boundaries
and establish the fledgling form amongst more established discplines
such as narratology, new media and film studies. The debate is well
summarized by Ian Bogost in his blog post, "Game Studies: Year Fifteen"
\cite{Bogost2015}, which echoes an initial journal article in /Game
Studies/ by Espen Aarseth.

This section does not focus on the debate, however, but instead
discusses the overall category of works that /The Wolf Among Us/
belongs in and situates the study in historical and disciplinary
approaches. Cinematic choice-based adventure games were introduced and
defined in the introduction. While the another genre label could be
considered a "Telltale-style" point and click graphical adventure, so
prevalent is Telltale's signature set of game mechanics and logics,
the effects and the mechanisms and the resulting insights that can be
obtained are firmly in the field of interactive digital narratives.

Interactive stories as a subject cut across most traditional
disciplinary boundaries. There are at least two international
gatherings dedicated to the study and creation of these types of
works: Interactive Narrative Technologies (INT), a workshop associated
with AIIDE, and International Conference on Interactive Digital
Storytelling (ICIDS). 

Authors of narrative works use craft to address the capabilities
identified by Marie-Laure Ryan using the material affordances of a
chosen medium, driven by the creator(s) "desire to touch the
audience"  \cite{Mckee1997}. Computational narratology has a close
relationship with the fields of interactive digital narratives and
interactive storytelling, informing and inspiring various approaches
and systems. Narratological concepts, such as the distinction Seymour
Chatman draws between "story" (the events as they occur
chronologically in a story world) and "discourse" (the order in which
events are related) have been used in a variety of fields ranging from
cognitive science \cite{Herman2013} to interactive storytelling
\cite{Name2014} to form hypotheses or as an inspiration for
computational models \cite{Chatman1980}.

Interactive Digital Narrative has several overarching genres
determined primarily by the original works and the primary interface
mechanics, including interactive fiction (IF), adventure games and
hypertext works. The subgenre of "cinematic choice-based adventure
games" was selected because of its heavy reliance on interpretation
instead of simulation or combination while still incorporating
alternate performances and even ontological changes in the story world
based on player choice. Traditional adventure games have certain
characteristics, though, including puzzles and more direct
manipulation of a player-character through a simulated space to
achieve objectives, which are not prevalent in /The Wolf Among Us/.

/The Wolf Among Us/ is one of several interactive digital narratives
produced by Telltale Games that earned critical acclaim for its
storytelling. Telltale's approach often incorporates material and
licenses adapted from another, non-interactive
medium [fn:1]. Telltale's brand of graphical adventure games has been
seen as noteworthy not only by game critics, but also by scholars
interested in applying alternative methodologies such as
microethnography \cite{Taylor2015}. The close relationship between
story content and interactivity makes this particular work a prime
subject for study using computational narratology. The fact that it
avoids emergent narrative or simulation makes the subgenre
particularly attractive for the approach described below of
associating a model of the surface content with video recordings of
traversals.

In this section we will also attempt to draw a distinction between the
genres of interactive digital narrative that the approach proposed
would be suitable for and the types that it may require additional
extension in order to address.

Another thread of work in interactive digital narratives proposes a
new vehicle for storytelling using the properties of computational
media: interactive drama, where player’s interactions with virtual
characters are handled in real time while retaining the emotional
power of dramatic works based on Aristotle's structural model for
drama \cite{Mateas2000a}. While the genre of interactive drama has
existed for a while, the ability for a computer to handle the roles
previously only possible using human actors and potentially even a
director or writer. Brenda Laurel's dissertation \cite{Laurel1986}
served as the inspiration behind this category. In it, Laurel lays out
a set of requirements that describe a computer system shaping a
narrative in real time for an audience. This work, postulated first in
Brenda Laurel’s dissertation \cite{Laurel1986}, is further imagined
and theorized by Janet Murray in /Hamlet on the Holodeck/
\cite{Murray1997a} and its first recognized instance was released by
Michael Mateas and Andrew Stern in the interactive drama Façade
\cite{mateas2003integrating}. Interactive Drama is a subset of
Interactive Digital Narratives that aspire to a high degree of
immersion, as described by Marie-Laure Ryan \cite{Ryan2015b}, where
the interface and the signs are close to those encountered in everyday
life instead of mediated through menus and convention-based controls.

*** Telltale-style Adventure Games
:PROPERTIES:
:ID:       1fz708r0c8h0@seebright.com
:END:

Adventure games have been studied both from a fan studies and
historical perspective by Salter \cite{Salter} and from a game studies
perspective with particular attention to the realtionship between
simulation and restoring the intended behavior of an author by
Fernandez Vara \cite{ClaraFernandez-Vara2009}. Adventure games are
recognized as a fairly old genre that is traceable to its origins in
the 1970s and its evolution as an expressive example of ergodic
literature \cite{Aarseth1997}.

Clara Fernandez Vara makes a distinction between representation and
simulation in her dissertation that adventure games have evolved so
that "the player does not stray too far from the behavior to be
restored" \cite{ClaraFernandez-Vara2009}. This restoration of behavior
is important in understanding RQ3, as the behavior to be restored is
varied in interesting ways through the sequence of narratively-charged
decisions that are unique to the subgenre. Fernandez-Vara goes on to
note that "the restoration of behavior must take place in a specific
way, so that the player enacts the events of the embedded story"
\cite{ClaraFernandez-Vara2009}.

The structure of adventure games enables an approach that addresses
many of the authoring problems of the open-ended story game approaches
while retaining a strong narrative. It is for this reason that it is
well suited for a content-based approach, as works such as Mateas and
Stern's interactive drama Facade have a much larger space of possible
traversals with things such as timing and possible input making the
work intractable for such an approach.

Telltale games has pioneered the subgenre identified in the
introduction (section [[id:i68is8r0c8h0@seebright.com]]) as a style that
is distinctive enough to begin being referred to as a "Telltale-style
adventure game" \cite{Hamilton2015}. It draws heavily from cinema in
its surface representations, to the point that it has even been called
interactive cinema. But despite the potential derogatory nature of
some of the comments on popular forums and the polemic against
non-game content being foregrounded in games, this particular type of
story game has struck many chords in the popular game criticism
community, as described by Maltbie in a post defending Telltale-style
games as video games:

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
My mind stayed engaged, I took responsibility for what happened, and
I was absorbed by the idea that I need to *pay attention to details if
I want the story to play out a certain way*. And that's an incredibly
personal experience when you get down to it. And at the end of the
chapter in the Telltale games, a menu shows how your choices differ
from other players who are going through the game for the first
time. If the experience is malleable like this, how can it not be a
game? \cite{Maltbie2016} [emphasis added]
#+END_QUOTE

Telltale games have been accused of "beads on a string," even if some
recognize the value of the illusion that is actually being
constructed:

"But one major complaint comes up again and again: Fast-paced choices
and moral quandaries are the most prominent feature of The Walking
Dead, but they seem to have no real consequences. Why did this game
receive approximately all of the awards in 2012 if its main selling
point is used so inconsequentially? I suggest that the most important
aspect about this game is not the many difficult choices it offers the
player – it’s the illusion of choice the game constructs."
\cite{Froschauer2014}

Froschauer goes on to make one of the claims that can be better
studied by addressing the second proposed research question: "the
amount of different content that needs to be produced is limited to a
minimum while, ideally, still giving you a feeling of agency"
\cite{Froschauer2014}.

David Cage describes this act as "bending stories," providing the
right hints, feedback and sets of reactions in order to ensure that
the branch isn't broken and that most of the effort is conserved
through most traversals \cite{Cage2006}. This approach is
diametrically opposed to the simulationist or combinatorial approach,
where material is generated or reconfigured on the fly without the
author's prior understanding and where "folding in" plot threads is
not currently an objective. Instead, simulationists have suggested
that a different type of authoring is required to account for the
generative power of simulationist/combinatorial story systems, such as
"quantum authoring," an approach Aaron Reed describes as holding the
many permutations of possible outcomes in an author's head as one
designs content for a combinatorial system.  Reed cites /Prom Week/ and
18 Cadence as examples of combinatorial story games where this
approach has been fruitful \cite{Reed2011}. 

While the desirable properties of the subgenre should be becoming
apparent, the main reason that /The Wolf Among Us/ was chosen was its
relatively shorter length than the full set of /Walking Dead/ seasons,
the critical acclaim it accrued and the discussions about the plot
that it inspired as well as the general familiarity I have with the
work and appreciation for its narrative and artistic goals.

* Prior Work
My original course of study was to combine visual art and creative
writing, and I only pursued computer science once I began to
appreciate its potential as a tool to tell stories. In that sense, my
undergraduate training and aspirations are imminently relevant to the
proposed work. The themes of narrative, visualization and structure
have persisted through each of the projects I’ve contributed to,
starting with my original undergraduate thesis project under Matt
Kirschenbaum and Ben Shneiderman. /StorySigns/ was a text annotation
tool I developed to assist in writing and understanding story
structures based on narrative theory by Seymour Chatman
\cite{Chatman1980}, especially the notion of satellite and kernel plot
events.  I used Flash to explore how one could combine the data
provided by the raw language representations with visualizations that
aided in understanding them. 

The proposed set of systems focuses on understanding non-textual media
using some of the powerful techinques currently applied to textual
stories. In this section I will review some of my previous works, both
of an academic nature and of an enterpreneurial nature, starting with
my experience in student film production.

** War Story
During my time as an undergraduate, I aspired to become a storyteller
through multiple media, not just through the creative writing I had
experimented with at the writer's house, but also through digital art
and performance. I was always fascinated with filmmaking, likely
citing a similar origin story with others through powerful works that
affected my development and tastes in my formative years.

Seeing an opportunity to learn about it more in an upper level digital
arts class, I jumped on it.  I storyboarded, scripted, directed,
filmed and edited a short film with a number of my classmates and
friends as actors. This experience provided me with invaluable insight
into how film, specifically moving images comprised of shots, works
from various artistic and critical points of view. During the project,
I performed all aspects of the film making process, and this
familiarity is what informed my initial investigations into using
non-linear video editing techniques as an avenue for tackling the
surface level content of cinematic choice-based story games.
** Flash Platform Studies
The interactions of technology, affordances and society are complex
and worthy of study. The Flash Platform presents an example of how a
software system can shape the artifacts and culture that are based on
it. In the proposed dissertation, an awareness of the use of
technology in shaping scholarship and culture is critical to
understanding how tools that can aid in computational narratology will
ultimately shape and contain their own ideological purposes. My
experience in researching the complex emotional and technical
relationships between users, developers and the platform itself
provides a perspective on the existent game community that keeps a
theoretical approach such as computational narrative grounded in the
pragmatics of the works' value both in the interactive storytelling
community as well as the perception of the work from the greater
audience of such works.

Flash and its underlying technologies shaped the way that we expect
rich media to behave and how we create content for it. Its compact
distribution format and flexible metaphors put it a decade ahead of
the standards-based HTML. In /Flash: Building the Interactive Web/
\cite{Salter2014}, I explore with my coauthor Anastasia Salter
the evolution of this platform and the various choices that were made
in its development and their implications for the role that software
platforms occupy in the evolution of technological culture. As the
platform matured, it implemented some of the best practices from
modern programming languages, but in turn it became harder to
understand and use for artists. The Flash Platform was unprecedented
in its accessibility which led to experimental works by the world's
best electronic literature practitioners and amateur works with mass
popularity such as those found in Newgrounds.

Flash's key affordance and its role specifically as a platform shaped
the types of artifacts produced enabled a generation of designers and
artists to acquire procedurally expressive skills that could be
leveraged on a massive distribution opportunity which was the early
web. The book has served as a textbook for introductions to digital
humanities (such as Rutger's Universities English 394 Spring 2015
course) as well as was contextualized in Apperley and Parikka's
assessment of the platform studies approach in the context of media
archeaology \cite{Apperley2015}.

** Seebright
It is rare that a technology has a chance to change the way we
perceive the nature of media, communication and ourselves. See-through
augmented reality is one such technology, taking a place alongside LED
screens and touchscreens present in smartphones and laptops as a
fundamental change with how we interact with media. Smartphones
revolutionized our relationship with websites and communication with
one another, and augmented reality has the potential to change the way
we understand the world and be effective agents within it. There
continues to be a divide between what humans are capable of
understanding and what effort is needed to model and communicate that
understanding to a computer. Augmented reality is one solution to that
problem: by presenting the computer’s understanding directly in front
of the user on top of their own perception of the world, the system
can cross that divide. Likewise, by having access to a user’s vision
and current context, computers can be capable of anticipating a user’s
needs and desires more effectively than through noisy channels such as
browser logs and GPS readings. Although consumer devices are still a
ways off, the value of see-through displays are evident from this need
to represent computer information to users more efficiently.

With Katherine Compton, I started Seebright to explore this question –
and through the course of the company’s development, I executed a
number of experiments and explorations, including designing a novel
control solution that would specifically allow the user to interact
with the system on the same level of representation: direct
manipulation.

More than anything, my experiences founding and working for Seebright
has provided me a grounding in what is valued by different communities,
and how to recognize and create value. I have an appreciation about
how industry perceives technological innovations, how it makes
decisions in the presence of risk and uncertainty, and how work of a
variety of types is defined and accomplished, and most of all how
important it is for academia to make efforts to inform industry about
the relevance of its work even as it communicates the nature and
importance of the research to the general public.

** Prototypes
During the first part of 2016, two prototypes were created to better
understand the nature of the proposed work and to lay the groundwork
for the systems described in the proposed work section. The goals and
the methods followed to produce them are described below, while a
description of the design is present in the appendix.
*** Surface Content Story Browser
The browser demonstrates the basic approach taken in the system
provide a set of parallel encodings of content locations that can be
used as various layers of surface discourse. Allow this content to be
rearranged according to the structural characteristics of the
underlying operational logic in the game, in particular choice points,
inventory items, decisions.
*** Story Browser Prototype
:PROPERTIES:
:ID:       nbnfcz7048h0@seebright.com
:END:
This section describes the current state of the Story Browser, as well
as outstanding issues that need to be addressed. This interface uses
the schema described in [[id:rrvhbt6048h0@seebright.com][Proposed Dramatic Story Game Surface Content Schema]]. 

     #+CAPTION: Story Browser Prototype Interface
     #+ATTR_HTML: :alt cat/spider image :title Action! :align right
     [[file:story_browser.png]]
The Story Browser Interface shows off two main features: 

1. A navigation timeline that shows the location of segments of
   content. In this version, there are two timelines. The first
   represents the raw content (divided into segments corresponding
   roughly to choice points and "cut scenes"
2. A choice selection interface which allows the user to specify which
   traversal to make "selected." Each choice point's options are
   displayed along with the segment that results, changing to the
   correct clip when the user selects the corresponding choice.
*** Prototype Surface Story Content Schema
:PROPERTIES:
:ID:       rrvhbt6048h0@seebright.com
:END:
The interface depicted in the section [[id:nbnfcz7048h0@seebright.com][Story Browser Prototype]] was a
motivation behind a number of the structural schema described
below. The goal was to isolate the key relationships in such a way as
to make it easy to program an interface to sort and select amongst
them.

This task quickly revealed itself to be fairly abritrary, as the
chosen language, JSON, was capable of representing the entities either
directly through hierarchy (a segment could contain a decision) or
indirectly through id reference (a segment could contain a refernce to
a choice, which itself could be contained in a separate location). 

The difficulty of evaluating the schema in absence of a concrete set
of interface use cases led to the suspension of schema development
once the interface described in [[id:nbnfcz7048h0@seebright.com][Story Browser Prototype]] was complete.
**** Timecodes
In film, a timecode is a way to uniquely identify every frame in a
piece of video. The format is similar to traditional time
representations, with hour, minute and second separated by colons. In
addition, this format includes the frame, which for the purposes of
this study will be at a framerate of 30 frames per second.

This means a format of 05:04:10 represents a frame at 5 minutes, 4
seconds and 10 frames, or frame number 9120.

Because this study considers non-linear games, the gameplay footage
cannot be simply mapped to traditional timecodes. Instead, the
gameplay is divided into segments roughly corresponding to cutscenes
and interaction opportunities. These are detailed in the following
sections.

**** Shots and Segments

In film studies, a shot by shot analysis usually divides film into
continuous sequences of frames which are separated by cuts or other
transitions. In this format, shots are identified by timecode and made
available for tagging as a semantic unit.

Sequences of shots are further aggregated into segments which indicate
key boundaries that are bounded by opportunities for interaction.

The proposed methods of dealing with this type of content is to
identify each segment uniquely and describe the relationship both to
the preceding and succeeding segments as well as the logical
conditions under which that segment is both shown and made available
(as in the case of choices where a certain condition must have been
met in order for a choice to be available).

This is a breakdown of the beginning portion of a single source file
into shots, showing the timecode for the start and end and the unique
ID used elsewhere.

#+BEGIN_SRC javascript
[
    {
        "shot_id": 0,
        "thumb" : null,
        "source_file" : "source_1",
        "source_begin" : "00:00:00",
        "source_end" : "00:08:18",
    },
    {
        "shot_id": 1,
        "thumb" : null,
        "source_file" : "source_1",
        "source_begin" : "00:08:27",
        "source_end" : "00:17:07",
    },
]
#+END_SRC

A segment is simply a set of shots that either are between, during or
result from a player action. This technique requires a different
tactic for free-roam segments (an example walkthrough for each
hotspot, for instance), but includes quick-time segments.

#+BEGIN_SRC javascript
[
  {
    "segment_id": 0,
    "type": "cutscene",
    "begin": "00:00:00",
    "end": "01:52:22",
    "thumb": null,
      "shots": [0,1,2,3,4,5,6,7,8,9,
                10,11,12,13,14,15,16,
                17,18],
    "beats": []
  },
  {
    "segment_id": 1,
      "type": "choice",
      "choices_id":0,
      "begin": "01:52:23",
      "end": "02:24:29",
      "predecessors":[0],
      "thumb": null,
      "shots": [19,20,21,22,23],
      "beats": []
  }
]
#+END_SRC
**** Choice Points

"Choice Points" are the segments where a (usually textual) menu of
responses are presented for the player to make a decision. They
usually consist of either a paraphrase of the response but can include
either silence or an action in brackets. Selecting an option triggers
a segment which dramatically presents how that choice plays out,
usually first by an action or a dialogue act by the player-character
(Bigby Wolf in /The Wolf Among Us/), followed by the response by
another character or character(s) and/or the environment.

Choice points represent a particularly important feature of the
encoded surface content. The data structure reflects both the role as
variable (each choice determines which future choices are available)
as well as preconditions (some choices requires that certain
conditions be met in order to be present in a set of choices).

This is a possible data structure that captures the graph
nature as well as the text necessary for rendering interfaces. It has
an ID of the associated segment that plays during the choice itself as
well as access to the text of the choice. Further additions would be
pre-conditions such as presence or absence of an inventory item or a
previous choice the player made.

#+BEGIN_SRC javascript
[{
		"segment_id": 5,
		"choices": [{
			"alt_id": 0,
			"choice_text": "So what have I walked into?",
			"next_segment": 7
		}, {
			"alt_id": 1,
			"choice_text": "What do you want me to do?",
			"next_segment": 7
		}, {
			"alt_id": 2,
			"choice_text": "[Head Upstairs]",
			"next_segment": 8
		}, {
			"alt_id": 3,
			"choice_text": "...",
			"next_segment": 7
		}]
	}]
#+END_SRC

Likewise, for quicktime events they would indicate the type, duration
and the action sequence in the same way that choices did.

#+BEGIN_SRC javascript{
		"quicktime_event": {
			"key": "up"
		}
	}, {
		"quicktime_choice": {
			"choices": [{
				"alt_id": 0,
				"description": "couch",
				"mouse": "left"
			}, {
				"alt_id": 1,
				"description": "sink",
				"mouse": "left"
			}]
		}
	}]
#+END_SRC
**** Dialogue

Another key content represented in this format is the dialogue. This
represents textual content, but it is usually for a full listing of
different structures supported and the types of information each
encodes. Below is a sample of some dialogue encoded for the first
scene:

For dialogue and other text, I plan to use the industry standard VTT
encoding which is used for subtitles and captions for video content. I
will provide it for each clip, and use the javascript API to show or
trigger the relevant dialogue lines.

Below is a sample of the encoding at work.

#+BEGIN_SRC javascript
[
    {
        "lineid": 0,
        "type": "text",
        "text": "Episode 1"
    },
    {
        "lineid": 1,
        "type": "text",
        "begin": "0:10:05",
        "end": "0:32:21",
        "text": "Once upon a time in New York City there lived
                 a community of fairy tale characters known as 
                 Fabletown. The Fables who live there arrived 
                 hundreds of years ago, after they were exiled 
                 from their Homelands"
    },
    {
        "lineid": 9,
        "type": "dialogue",
        "begin": "1:56:01",
        "end": "1:56:29",
        "speaker": "bigby",
        "text": "Mr. Toad?"
    },
    {
        "lineid": 10,
        "type": "dialogue",
        "begin": "1:57:05",
        "end": "1:58:23",
        "speaker": "toad",
        "text": "Oh shit"
    },

]
#+END_SRC

*** Process to Encode Surface Content
For the Story Browser prototype, I selected and employed a manual
process for encoding the surface content. From my experience in
Seebright (working with a professional production company to create a
concept video) as well as in the production of the student film /War
Story/, I have become familiar with the use of non-linear video
editing tools such as Adobe Premier Pro. These tools enable precise
editing and combination of source video files, using operations such
as inserting a cut (a segmentation of a video file based on a timecode
that specifies a location for potential insertion of another clip. The
principle role of an editor is to select which frame of a source clip
on which to cut to an adjacent film. This selection of timing usually
happens during an action or dialogue line in order to maintain
"continuity" or the percption of continous space and time. These
decisions both are based on and result in a "shot list" which is the
series of "shots" that are sequenced to create the film.

This process of creating a cinematic artifact provides a guide for how
to analyze one, as the same decisions that are made during the
planning, shooting and editing phases affect the final sequence. These
represent three phases of production: storyboarding, filming source
footage (in the form of multiple variants of a single scene), and the
final editing of the shots into a finished sequence. In the
storyboarding phase, the goal is to select angles and segmentation of
the dialogue in a script that best convey the important story
points. They must also convey the continuity of action and the salient
emotions and reactions necessary for an audience to understand the
story content. In the source footage phase, the goal is to record
several variations or versions (takes) of a performance by the
actors. The last stage is to combine and intersperse the takes and
select exactly which frames the cut between shots should occur
on. These are determined mainly by timing and understanding through
continuity -- for instance starting an action in one shot and
continuing that same action in the next shot. Another goal is to
ensure a consistent progression and spatial relationship between
actors and setting.

In the first minute of the student film I produced, /War Story/
(viewable at https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UOrLMQWsn04), there are
12 shots that together portray the action of one student greeting
another in a library, the student picks up his bag and decides to
catch up to the first student, the observation of a flier promoting an
event and their eventual meeting. Each shot was planned to convey a
certain mood and atmosphere, relate a specific action performed by a
character and reinforce a characterization as well as to convey in
that single minute a continous reality even if the story time was not
continuous. An audience member does not need to know the exact
terminology of the shot types, and in fact like our first definition
of narrative, an audience member will understand a sequence of such
shots as a story.

In creating an encoded version of the content presented in the Story
Browser, the process of collection will involve documenting each
possible segment of content and either recording it or finding it
already recorded by other players on video sharing services such as
YouTube. 

There are two parts to this collection process. The first part
involves documenting the logical structure of the traversal paths,
while the second part involves finding or recording the content that
is associated with a particular set of edges in the traversal
graph. The first part involves recording segment association with each
branch point of the graph, and testing whether these branch points
have effects on subsequent content availability, performances or
choices. The total set of traversals will first be charted by
examining the set of available player guides and walkthroughs that
contain information about consequential decisions. These community
efforts will guide which traversals are potentially vary based on
prior choices. The recordings are associated with the requisite
preconditions and a graph that records all possible traversal
paths. The second part involves recording and identifying shots and
potential equivalence relationships between shots in different
traversals and identifying them with respect to the previous decisions
that had to have been made to access it. If there are enough remaining
traversals that have not been accounted for, or if there are any that
may have an effect on a piece of content, a more automated approach
(whereby the gameplay is recorded and varied using a macro that
performs the player input).

For instance, the first sequence where Bigby is called to investigate
a domestic disturbance by Mr. Toad, he is presented with a set of
dialogue options that have a significant choice embedded within
them. The choice is whether Bigby lets Mr. Toad off easy, or whether
he issues a stern warning. While this is a subtle distinction, there
are certain choices that lead to one of the two paths that determines
future content references. This significant choice is the only one,
however, in the sequence. The rest merely determine the performance of
"satellite" performances which provide a level of responsiveness to
the player's decisions. These are independent of one another and can
be recorded separately and combined based on the immediately preceding
choice. For example, a video recording choice B at decision point 2
can be combined with a separate video recording choice A at decision
point 1 to duplicate the experience of having chosen A then B in
order.

In a like way, decisions regarding the activation or acquisition of
inventory items either in conversation or during free-roam segments
can likewise be associated with future content possibilities.

In the current form of the story browser, the content is recorded as
segments reflecting their variation, but it is anticipated that
increasing the granularity would better provide for comparisons
between different traversals in terms of which shots and lines of
dialogue are identical.

For quicktime events, for the most part the failure to perform the
event in time results in an alternative content segment indicating
that failure but which otherwise progresses the sequence. Some result
in the character's death, which then must be attempted again to
progress. There are cases where a significant decision is presented as
a quick-time event, emulating the split-second decision making that the
protagonist must inevitably make.

One of the challenges that will need to be addressed in the proposed
work is collecting a complete set of content, and in being confident
in that coverage. Two approaches

*** Schemata Editor
The initial goal for the semantic graph editor is threefold:
1.	Provide a means of navigating a semantic graph encoding such
   as SIG, including direct creation of nodes and links.
2.	Provide a visualization that organizes SIG elements according
   to their properties
3.	Enable an author to create a SIG encoding without violating
   the Schemata and only allow creation of links and nodes that are
   allowed by the schemata.

The editor currently supports free-form creation of typed nodes, using
a force-directed layout provided by d3 and based on a graph editor
developed by Ross Kirsling and released under the MIT license. The
editor displays arc types according to the SIG schemata, but does not
currently enforce arcs or nodes. Each element can be inspected using a
window in the lower left corner. The next version of the editor will
include a means of visualizing both text content and the non-linear
video content described by the browser. The hope is that this editor
will be backwards compatible with existing SIG encodings in the
DramaBank and provide a valuable tool for analyzing and visualizing
SIG structures.

     #+CAPTION: Semantic Graph Editor Prototype Interface
     [[file:semantic_graph_overview.png]]

**** Schema Editor
:PROPERTIES:
:ID:       8zs4eaz059h0@seebright.com
:END:
     #+CAPTION: Node Type Panel and Properties
     #+ATTR_LATEX: :width 3cm
     [[file:schema_panel.png]] 

The editor is designed to facilitate editing and experimentation with
schemas. To that end, this panel enables users to switch between
schemas, create schemas and save them. The currently selected schema
is highlighted in blue, while schemas present on the client have
dashed outlines.

Future features include keeping track of versions of schemas, as well
as finding all graphs associated with a schema.

**** Graphs
     #+CAPTION: Node Type Panel and Properties
     #+ATTR_LATEX: :width 3cm
     [[file:graph_panel.png]] 

The graph panel reflects the current graph that is displayed in the
main display area. By clicking on a different graph, the display is
refreshed with the particular contents of that graph.

**** Node Types
:PROPERTIES:
:ID:       havh9l7069h0@seebright.com
:END:
     #+CAPTION: Node Type Panel and Properties
     #+ATTR_LATEX: :width 3cm
     [[file:node_type_panel.png]]

David Elson described a schemata consisting of 8 different node types,
each of which are listed below:

*Text* (TE) 

A node corresponding to a segment of text.

*Proposition* (P)

A modeled formal content. Elson is agnostic to the exact system used
to model the content of the proposition node, and this work follows
the later encodings which omit such proposition-level representations
in favor of a placeholder for a proposition that is given meaning
through it's relationship to characters and goals, even if it is only
described using text.

*State* (S)

A node representing a single instant in time in interval logic. A
proposition can begin at or end at different states to indicate
duration.

*Timeline* 

A node associated through the (in) arc with a set of states, real or
hypothetical. This can be used for the actual events as well as
hypothetical timelines or belief states.

*Interpretive Proposition*

A proposition in the interpretive context. These may be inferred by
the annotator, and not necessarily correspond to the surface
discourse.

*Goal*

The goal node is used to indicate membership of interpretive
propositions

*Belief*

A belief node encloses a particular agent's idea of the world. It can
be either a single entity or a collection of entities that share the
same beliefs. A goal could be to create a belief state for another
agent.

*Affect*

Every goal must be associated with a character's affectual result,
which is not specified by the schemata but often refers to properties
like EGO or HEALTH.

**** Arc Types
:PROPERTIES:
:ID:       3macmm7069h0@seebright.com
:END:
     #+CAPTION: Semantic Graph Editor Prototype Interface
     #+NAME:   fig:link_panel
     #+LABEL: fig:link_panel
     #+ATTR_LATEX: :width 3cm
     [[file:link_type_panel.png]] 

Links are the arcs that traverse between nodes. They can be one of a
number of types. This panel describes and controls which nodes are
legal for each side of the link. See Figure [[fig:link_panel]]

There are also three properties:
- *Directed* The link's directionality is significant
- *Homogenous* Does the link only connect nodes of the same type?
- *One/Many* How many links of this type can there, either incoming or
  outgoing?

The interface allows the user to fold arcs as well as rename them.

The arcs present in the Story Intention Graph are briefly described
below (from \cite{Elson2012}):

*Follows* (f)

Arc that determines order in a sequence of states or text nodes

*Interpreted As* (ia)

Arc connecting proposition (P) to corresponding text nodes (TE)

*Begins at*

Determines start time (corresponding to a State) for a proposition node (P)

*Ends at*

Connects end state (S) for proposition (P)

*In*

Associates state (S) with timeline (T)

*Referenced By*

Associates P or I node with timeline which incorporates it modally.

*Equivalent*

Connects two state (S) nodes to show equivalence on different timelines (T)

*Implies*

Implication by a P node of an I, G or B node

*Actualizes*

Connects a P node to a interpretive proposition, goal or belief node
when the inference is that those are actualized by that proposition

*Ceases*

The same as actualizes but ceases a I, G or B node.

*Would cause*

Show dependency relation between one I, G or B node and another

*Would prevent*

Show anti-dependency relation between one I, G or B node and another

*Precondition for*

Shows necessity of one I, G or B node for another

*Precondition against*

Shows necessity that one I, G or B node must be ceased for another

*Attempt to cause*

Intention by an agent through proposition to actualize an I, G or B node

*Attempt to prevent*

Similar to attempt to cause but with intention to prevent

*Provides for*

Positive affectual impact of I, G or B node to an A node of an agent

*Damages*

Negative affectual impact of an I, G or B node to an A node associated
with an agent

For more details, see Elson's dissertation where the schemata and its
various rules are fully detailed.
**** Rules
A schemata is not simply a set of nodes types and link types. It also
consists of a set of logical rules that enforce the structural
properties of the schemata. Below are the rules that make a SIG
"legal" in Elson's terminology. In the editor, these rules will likely
be implemented as a set of JavaScript tests that are run on the graph
every time a change occurs, highlighting the violating nodes and the
rule violated.

Some examples of rules present in the SIG schemata are the "sink"
property where each goal must result in a positive or negative impact
to a character through an affect node. This enforces the desire for
the schemata to only represent events that influence the state of
agents and not necessarily inconsequential events or plans.

* Proposed Work
The work proposed includes developing an extension of an existing
model of narrative discourse for interactive and cinematic media (a
game in the cinematic choice-based adventure game genre) in order to
investigate whether the deep structures of a story can predict player
attribution of encountered content for their decisions in key choice
points. The proposed work will pioneer the use of this dual structure
and hopes to inform both the creation of story content as well as
understanding how the surface structure and deep structure relates to
create a sense of satisfaction.

The system and the evaluation built using it indexes of the surface
content elements using story control logics and concepts from film in
order to interpret them using Elson's SIG schemata. By comparing the
resulting content and semiotic relationships between the two domains
(surface structure and the SIG encoding), I anticipate uncovering
aspects of how the subgenre of cinematic choice-based adventure games
is able to be as successful as it is (both critically and
commercially) without relying on simulations, emergent narrative or
ludic mechanics (as, for instance, Jonathan Blow's /The Witness/ or
Valve's /Portal/).

The work is comprised of several related efforts, outlined here and
described in more detail in this section:

1. Develop an surface content encoding schema based on operational
   logics described in the section on [[id:tx6har00e8h0@seebright.com][Story Control Logics]] which
   contains surface representations present in the original work,
   required for later interpretation (in form of video segments)
2. Encode /The Wolf Among Us/ by extracting and recording the surface
   media
3. Develop browser for this dataset that highlights the variations and
   interactions by the player
4. Extend an existing computational narratology formalism (SIG) to
   account for the possible worlds present in branching narratives
5. Using this extended SIG, create an encoding of the surface content
   onto constructs such as states, goals, beliefs and actions
6. Design an experiment which demonstrates that the extended SIG
   formalism correctly predicts the previous content relevant to a
   player's decision

In the previous section, two prototypes were described and presented
that demonstrate progress toward the main goals: accurately describing
the surface story content and extending existing semantic graph
schemata in order to map it onto the newly developed model of surface
story content for cinematic choice-based adventure games.

We will begin by introducing an appropriate synthesis of existing
methodologies that can be adopted, followed by a model for encoded
surface story content, a system that would support that encoding, and
finish with a discussion about ways to evaluate these contributions
along with a selection of sample analyses that show the types of
insights that are anticipated.

** Methodology
The proposed methodology is a synthesis of methods from digital
humanities, computational linguistics and artificial intelligence
research. For the first two research questions (RQ1 and RQ2), a
relevant theory is used to extend or create a novel encoding. For the
first, the theory from film studies and operational logics are used to
identify key structural properties of the subgenre. For the second
research question, the principle one is that espoused frequently by
Marie-Laure Ryan of Possible Worlds Theory. This theory, along with
hypertext theory, provides the vocabulary and expressivity necessary
to extend the Story Intention Graph schemata to account for SIG
"hyperpatterns" and to handle a set of possible stories (and their
corresponding traversals) instead of the single story that
distinguishes actual from hypothetical in the current schemata.

A common approach of computational linguistics and even a digital
humanities practice is a distant reading. This practice tabulates and
compares properties across a (usually large) body of work. Examples of
this "corpus" approach include /Google N-Gram/, /TimeML/
\cite{Ingria2003}, The /Penn Discourse Treebank/ \cite{Prasad2008} and
Elson's /DramaBank/ \cite{Elson2012b}. The two major drawback of this
approach to studying humanistic works are the knowledge engineering
that must be done prior to encoding the works and the lack of focus on
the relationships within a single story. In the case of collecting a
corporus, this necessarily involves developing a schema of tags and an
ontology of concepts and how they are related before the corpus is
annotated. This can be more or less tractable; in linguistic cases
where the various categories are fairly fixed, there is not a lot of
variations in schema, but in cases where the structure itself is far
from stable such as in narratological interpretation, the value of the
corpus is reduced relative to a singular work for certain types of
insights.

The first effort already begun is to define and a model of surface
story content found in these games and do so using an existent work
that has the desired properties. This data, in whatever format it
would be finalized as, would become the "text"[fn:4] in the SIG
schemata, and would provide whatever information was necessary to
capture the impacts of interactivity.

** /The Wolf Among Us/ Surface Story Content Encoding
:PROPERTIES:
:ID:       7ag9o190f8h0@seebright.com
:END:
One of the primary contributions will be the release of the encoded
surface story content of /The Wolf Among Us/. This annotated
collection of recordings of the surface content (in the form of
traversal video segments) will be instrumental in further content
analysis. The nature of this contribution is distinguished from
"corpus" based approaches, as unlike collecting multiple
interpretations of a single text or collecting multiple texts, this
approach outlines the application of schemata (also a contribution of
this proposal) to the encoding of the surface representations. A
similar approach has been taken by the Text Encoding Initiative (TEI),
but several different fundamental decisions differ, including the use
of a standoff, operational logics-based formalism instead of attention
to minute surface details of the representation itself.

The particular genre that Telltale Games subscribes to draws heavily
from medium-specific techniques adapted from film and
television. Accordingly, the vocabulary and a review of critical
approaches that are relevant are outlined here as they relate to the
surface representation. The design of a surface encoding that
incorporates the work done in film studies is imperative, and part of
the proposed work is to evaluate both techniques of close-analysis of
film as well as other critical methods that film studies employs to
understand the role that mimetic moving images play in conveying
story meaning.

Likewise the cinematic choice-based adventure game subgenre mechanics
have many properties that are worth modeling and which apply to other
interactive stories and digital interactive narratives.

** Computational Narratology System Proposal
There are three related systems proposed for this work.

First, a *story browser*, which enables display and organization of
encoded surface content.

Second, a *schemata editor*, for creating and extending schemata
(starting with SIG). This tool is used to experiment with different
formats, relationships and types that best balance expressivity with
robustness.

Third, an *annotation tool*, for annotating both textual and
non-textual stories. This is used to create encodings that map onto
cinematic choice-based adventure games that usually are built from
non-linear and non-textual story content. This tool will aid in the
encoding of the /The Wolf Among Us/ uing the extended SIG formalism.

The annotation system proposed is a direct successor to
/Scheharazade/, in that it is designed to enable and study encodings
of narrative works using SIG. It would be ideal for it to both consume
and produce files of its predecessor, as well as enable a wider
distribution and set of compatible devices through distribution using
web technologies.

The SIG encoding is a semantic graph, or a graph which conforms to a
particular schemata (detailed in Elson’s dissertation). This
schemata's properties can be used to make inferences based on the type
of nodes and edges and various properties that hold true. While this
data structure is amenable to processing and machine learning because
of its relationship to the source material, the existing interface
does not provide analytical features, these must be accessed via the
published Java API. Further, /Scheharazade/ and the underlying SIG
layers (Text and State) do not support non-textual source material,
interactivity or branching stories.

The below presents a scrollable view of Elson’s interpretive layer as
depicted in the tool developed for use by annotators:

     #+CAPTION: /Scheherazade/ Graph Visual Interface
     #+NAME:   fig:link_panel
     #+LABEL: fig:link_panel
     #+ATTR_LATEX: :width 12cm
     [[file:elson_scheherazade.png]] 
 
While the primary contributions of the proposed dissertation are a
surface content model, an extension of SIG to account for branching
stories and a surface story content dataset of /The Wolf Among Us/,
these contributions place an increased requirement for the tools that
address them to enable encoding, exploration and analysis.

The following systems provide the means to author a schemata, use it
for encoding and leverage its analytical capabilities to explore a
dataset of surface story content and its associated SIG
encodings. Once the dataset has been collected, the associated content
can be used in a variety of ways, especially due to the richness of
the captured video. One example would be through classification of
shots, characters or scenes using machine learning algorithms. Another
would be to recognize characters or emotions in the associated video
files. By precisely delineating the surface material representations,
the operational logics and the deeper interpretive structures, this
dataset presents an opportunity to study interactive stories in a
variety of ways.


*** Story Content Browser
:PROPERTIES:
:ID:       pc99b2h0i8h0@seebright.com
:END:
For textual stories, there are many ways to explore the content from a
linguistic perspective, and increasingly even from a deeper structural
view. A single novel can fill a screen if displayed with various
techniques. The Story Content Browser would use the surface content
structure model to allow a user to visualize and play with the full
set of possible player traversals, or "protostory" in Koenitz's
terminology \cite{Hartmut2015}.

Currently the only way to explore the narrative of games such as /The
Wolf Among Us/ is to use video traversals combined with playing the
game itself. This has a number of disadvantages. Formally referencing
a particular state is difficult, as each traversal contains a number
of choices which determine the content at any given point. There have
been some efforts to instrument games so that an automated or even
computer-assisted analysis can take place, but these are not possible
to apply to published commerical games of this nature
\cite{T.Bullen2007}. Comparisons of choice paths are difficult, as it
would require aligning different traversals with the same previous
choices. And finally, annotation is impossible, as there is no current
way to associate annotated content with the series of decisions that
led to its presentation.

For cinematic choice-based adventure games, this means depicting the
totality of choices in a game, as well as allowing access to the
variations and permutations based on previous choices up to a point.

Future work in the browser involves tools to measure and understand
the variations.

*Requirements for Story Browser*

- Must be able to view an entire dataset in a single screen (overview
  and detail design pattern)
- Must allow subgraphs to be visible for particular purposes
  (consistency, character timelines, etc)
- Must be able to succinctly depict causal and intentional sequences
  as such.
*** Schemata Editor
Formalizing narrative constructs is a primary activity in narratology,
making statements about narratives that apply and are useful in their
study. It is particularly important for the theoretical constructs to
be of use in other disciplines, especially those of interactive
storytelling. 

David Elson's Story Intention Graph schemata is a unified formalism
that is supported by a tool to operationalize its application to
textual narratives.

In order to extend the SIG formalism it becomes desirable to evaluate
and tweak the additions to achieve various objectives.

*Requirements for Semantic Graph/SIG editor*
- Supports editing the relationships between node type and arc type
- Supports testing with a set of sample graphs
- Desirable to be backward compatible with previous SIG encodings

*** Annotation Tool
Benefits to the SIG approach is the organization of
interpretations. The proposed annotation tool is an extension of the
story browser to include those features of Elson's /Scheharazade/ that
are necessary to encode a SIG and associate it with the proposed
surface structure. While there is not an existing prototype for this
component, some requirements have become apparent:

*Sample Requirements*:

- Be able to focus down to a single scene and relevant previous events
  and/or future events
- Be able to annotate a set of traversals that all intersect at a
  given story control point

While this initial list is worth pursuing in the next set of
prototypes, it is likely only through use and applying the tools to
future projects that I will determine the final format and system
** Evaluation
:PROPERTIES:
:ID:       oyec8711e8h0@seebright.com
:END:
There are three primary research questions detailed above, repeated
here:

- *RQ1*. How do you define and represent, using story control logics,
  the significant story-related surface content of cinematic
  choice-based adventure games?

- *RQ2* What extensions are necessary for the Story Intention Graph
  schemata to cover the possibility space of variations present in the
  story of a cinematic choice-based adventure games?

- *RQ3* Can an extended SIG, encoded with the surface content and
  provided a set of decisions made by a player, predict players'
  attribution of which previous content was influential in their
  decision for significant choices in /The Wolf Among Us/?

*** Evaluating RQ1 
:PROPERTIES:
:ID:       ep1b8cd159h0@seebright.com
:END:

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
*RQ1*. How do you define and represent, using story control logics,
the significant story-related surface content of cinematic
choice-based adventure games?
#+END_QUOTE 

The first question suggests several strategies for evaluation. The
definition of the content types, categories and boundaries determine
the types of operations and questions which it can answer. This leads
to the notion that taking a set of test questions and applying them to
the content, once recorded, would provide enough evidence of the
approach's utility to answering non-obvious questions.

These questions are simply the beginning to the more interesting
questions that arise from comparing the surface content to the deep
narrative structure that guides the actual experience of the work.

In order to tease apart the types of insights that are possible with a
dataset that documents the content as an operational logic, below are
some examples of questions that engage with just the surface story
content itself without requiring the deep story structure and its
necessary interpretation which SIG provides for.

- How much (in terms of percentage) of the content in /The Wolf Among
  Us/ is displayed to a player on average? This requires a mechanistic
  tabulation of the surface story content without any interpretation
  or reference to SIG content, but would be useful in answering
  questions about authorial burden or "efficiency" of the work's usage
  of hand-authored content in a more precise way than lines of
  dialogue.
- What are the distributions of traversal length? Do traversal length,
  measured by either content elements or total time, follow a normal
  curve?
- How can each decision be ranked in terms of its impact on the
  possible traversals it is a precondition for?

The hypothesis is that by using elements traditionally analyzed by
film to segment the work and using the three "story control"
operational logics (OL1, OL2, OL3 & OL4), a number of questions which
engage the material surface could be formulated.  The answers can be
strengthened by using the surface content dataset and the
visualizations and examples it would highlight. An example of such a
traversal could be one discovered where the player-character has the
shortest total traversal time as measured by summing up the duration
of each segment length. What choices did the player make that gave
rise to such a traversal? Were they surprising in any way? How much do
similar traversals vary, and were there any indicators as to their
significance in those dialogue options?

*** Evaluating RQ2
:PROPERTIES:
:ID:       g6ndcpb0f8h0@seebright.com
:END:

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
*RQ2* What extensions are necessary for the Story Intention Graph
schemata to cover the possibility space of variations present in the
story of a cinematic choice-based adventure games?
#+END_QUOTE

The second question digs deeper into how the approach outlined in the
system can inform and guide questions that go beyond identifying
patterns and automating the highlighting of structural features such
as similarity. It primarily addresses the need to account for the
presence of multiple possible worlds, only one of which is actualized
in a given traversal. 

How do you recognize that the extensions actually accomplish the
objective?

Currently, it is possible to use Story Intention Graphs to annotate a
single traversal of /The Wolf Among Us/. The schemata even has the
ability to account for the modal timelines of potential actions that
the main character could have taken.

However, when the player makes a choice, the choice-path not taken is
never "actualized" through the arc in the schemata, nor is there a
means to account for this path through the story.

An extension to the SIG would then be sufficient if it met the
following criteria:

**** Extended SIG Evaluation Criteria
*Represent any possible traversal of the game according to the story
control logics*

An extended SIG should represent the full set of possible traversals
of the story, such that any particular traversal of a player

*Clearly delineate dependency between decisions and content*

Any changes to the content that are associated with a prior decision should be easy to trace back to the decision that determined them.

*Remained tractable for authoring and annotation purposes*

While every particular traversal is unique, much of the content itself
(including large portions of the story) in /The Wolf Among Us/ is in
fact conserved. This means that these elements, either characters,
goals or beliefs, should be conserved between traversals as much as
possible while allowing for the potential for differing
interpretations in any given traversal.

*Enable simple selection and browsing of the possible traversals*

The SIG schemata was originally designed to highlight analogous
relationships between stories by ensuring that elements were largely
similar in structure between stories. In this criteria, the goal is to
make sure the chosen modifications highlight content or choice points
that influence the current state of the story.

**** Sample SIG extensions

The following are a set of possible extensions to the SIG schemata
that would address the criteria above. The addition of new nodes
rather than modification of existing nodes would allow the schemata to
be a proper superset of the existing schemata, which would also allow
existing algorithms to operate on it.

*Hyperstate* (HS) node

A hyperstate is a substitution for the state node. A hyperstate can be
in one of several variants based on preconditions that are influenced
by prior choice points or the presence or absence of inventory.

It is possible that the hyperstate is the only necessary addition, but
by adding metadata to the nodes, it may require too much logic to be
added to the rest of the nodes.

*Hyper Proposition* (HP), *Hyper Interpretive Proposition* (HIP) nodes

These nodes would likely need to be modified in order to depend on the
previous or current hyperstates. Examples of these would be the death
of a character which occurs in some traversals but not others.

*Potential*, *Actualized* (hp) (ha) arcs

The addition of the potentiality arc will further drive in the
perceived story from the perspective of a choice point. Because the
player does not have access to the actual outcome of a choice not
chosen, this selection may be either represented as a specific arc or
as a property on an arc (indicating which of the several possible
actions were taken)

*Player* (PL) node

A node which reflects the player's agency in determining
actions, and which each *Choice* arc eminates from. Having *Player*
nodes also enables multiple traversals to co-exist in a graph form,
each anchored to a Player node.

*Player Interaction* (pi) arc

An arc between a player and a hyper state
which determines, for that player, which set of propositions are
actualized or potential.

*** Evaluating RQ3
:PROPERTIES:
:ID:       ip68y67159h0@seebright.com
:END:

#+BEGIN_QUOTE
*RQ3* Can an extended SIG, encoded with the surface content and
provided a set of decisions made by a player, predict players'
attribution of which previous content was influential in their
decision for significant choices in /The Wolf Among Us/?
#+END_QUOTE

The main way of evaluating this research question is through the
design of a study, one which evaluates whether the predicted
importance of certain pieces of content does in fact agree with the
players rating of their importance relative to a particular decision.

The hypothetical study design that would evaluate this is described
below.

A collection of players are asked to play The Wolf Among Us, noting
each of their decisions each time they make it using an iPad. These
decisions are recorded to ensure that a record of the content they
were presented with is fixed and that, until the final decision point,
a "fulfilled" SIG can be fixed using them.

Each player plays until the point in the narrative where the key
decision is presented. Usually these are binary decisions, and there
is usually only one in each episode. In /The Wolf Among Us/ this
decision at the end is whether to call for the execution of the main
villain or whether to exile him. 

The actual decision itself is measured within the game and presented
to players. Some decisions are more lopsided than others. It is my
hypothesis that this lopsidedness of some decisions verus others can
be explained by the number of traversals which present supporting
content for a particular choice in each of these key choice paths.

Once the player makes the final decision, they will then be presented
with a selection of clips that are related to the decision based on
shared surface content. This set is complete, and the player is asked
to rate each piece of content on a scale from 1 to 3 as to how much it
influenced which decision they made.

The hypothesis is that those decisions which are more lopsided have
more content which supports the value at stake in the decision (either
through clips that are sympathetic to the character involved or which
reinforce a particular value of the community).

This content is then compared to a set of content selected as causally
related to the decision paths and compared on a similar scale.

** Proposed Work Summary

This section outlined a set of works that would address a number of
pressing open questions in the narrative modeling and computational
narratology communities. The surface story structure encoding and
proposed hand-encoded version of /The Wolf Among Us/ would be of value
regardless of the final formalisms or systems applied to it down the
line. The schemata editor acknowledges the importance of continual
innovation and of experimentation when investigating models, while the
story browser acknowledges the need for natively humanist methods of
exploring and arriving at insights even with computational aid.

* Schedule
Below is a simple schedule for pursuing the work outlined in this
document. While it does provide a clear set of milestones and ways to
publish and get feedback on intermediate results, part of the goal is
to discover what opportunities this approach can open up.

| *Quarter*   | *Activity*                                                                    |
|-------------+-------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Spring 2016 | Advance                                                                       |
|             | Begin initial development and first testing of system based on S.I.G in April |
|-------------+-------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Summer 2016 | Present at ELO Conference 2016, do initial encoding of /The Wolf Among Us/    |
|             | Revise prototypes into more functional variants based on story control logics |
|-------------+-------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Fall 2016   | Present at conferences                                                        |
|             | Conduct an initial assessment of the encoding                                 |
|             | Develop SIG extension and test according to criteria outlined                 |
|-------------+-------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Winter 2017 | Refine system based on feedback                                               |
|             | Conduct controlled user study for predicted references extended SIG           |
|             | Writing Dissertation                                                          |
|-------------+-------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Spring 2017 | Working on papers for fall deadline conferences                               |
|-------------+-------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Fall 2017   | Go on job market, conference presentations                                    |
|-------------+-------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| Winter 2018 | Defend dissertation, more conferences                                         |

* Closing 
Cinematic choice-based adventure games are popular and successful
non-linear narratives that are often seen as an anomaly in their
reliance on hand-authored content, but what they represent is an
opportunity to understand story and interactivity in a genre that is
potentially tractable for computational narratology approaches. The
proposed work will develop a corpus for researchers looking to compare
theoretical approaches and assess results of novel systems that use
computational narratology as a basis and conduct an initial study. By
better understanding what works using existing tools, we can better
understand both how to develop better content, how to understand how
existing artifacts create the effects that they do and further
anticipate how to create more efficient and powerful authoring tools
and systems.

#+BIBLIOGRAPHY:  AdvancementProposal plain alimit:t option:--both

* Footnotes

[fn:9] This is influenced by Michael Mateas' concept of "content
selection architectures" as a useful way to describe how various types
of content and the configuration of the systems that organize them can
be compared. \cite{Mateas2015}

[fn:8] labeled deterministic, even though these works could branch and
Chris Crawford sense of instantial \cite{Crawford1982} could just as
well apply

[fn:7] Even in their contemporary generated kin, such as Meehan's /Talespin/
\cite{Meehan1981}

[fn:6] Quantic Dream, 2010

[fn:5] In interactive fiction, this is a textual transcript as all
input and output of the work is recorded in a log.

[fn:4] the string of characters that is the entirety of the original
work considered in Elson's dissertation as referenced by text nodes
\cite{Elson2012}

[fn:3] The SIG Schemata is agnostic to the format or even the presence
of a logical proposition within each of these "Proposition" nodes.

[fn:2] As opposed to "procedural" content, the distinction Chris
Crawford describes in his 1984 book "The Art Of Computer Game
Design." He even goes on to claim in his discussion that "A game
derives its quality from the richness of the network of options it
presents. These options are only accessible through the
process-intensive aspects of the game." \cite{Crawford1982}

[fn:1] One recent Telltale Games work, Minecraft, uses a sandbox-style
creation game based on voxels as its basis, which departs from
previous works that use either comics or television.




